# CVD-mci
Background Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death and a major contributor to disability worldwide. In recent years, machine learning (ML) has been increasingly applied to CVD mortality prediction. However, most studies have not conducted mediation causal inference to uncover potential causal pathways and have rarely explored subgroup mechanisms underlying varying CVD survival outcomes. This study aims to develop an ML framework capable of performing mediation causal inference and identifying CVD mortality subgroups in the general population.

Methods After data preprocessing, we first applied mediation causal inference to explore potential pathways among 20 exposure factors, 47 laboratory indicators, and CVD mortality using the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2007–2014 dataset. Exposure factors and laboratory indicators with mediation effects were used as features to construct CVD mortality prediction models based on four ML algorithms. SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) were employed to interpret the models and guide feature reduction according to feature importance ranking. We compared model performances to determine the optimal feature set and model. The selected features and predicted probabilities were integrated with consensus clustering to identify CVD mortality subgroups and construct mediation causal networks illustrating potential transitions among subgroups. Finally, these mediation relationships were validated across regions using the UK Biobank (UKB) dataset.

Results We identified mediation pathways involving 19 exposure factors, 42 laboratory indicators, and CVD mortality events at three follow-up time points. ML models combining these factors outperformed those using individual indicators in predicting 3-, 5-, and 10-year CVD mortality. The optimal model was a logistic regression (LR) with 10 input features, achieving areas under the curve (AUCs) of 0.884 (95% CI: 0.847–0.917), 0.896 (95% CI: 0.865–0.924), and 0.879 (95% CI: 0.855–0.902), respectively. Consensus clustering identified three subgroups, and the transition network revealed that demographic and socioeconomic factors mediated changes in laboratory indicators contributing to subgroup transitions.

Conclusions This ML framework enables CVD mortality prediction, risk stratification, and mechanism exploration using 10 clinical variables.
